one of the most interesting things is
we're told we're made in the image of
God but it was God that told human
beings to do biology name the animals
that's taxonomy it's the fundamental
intellectual discipline I'm not going to
do it for you you do it for yourself and
so the capacity of human beings to think
in that sense whatever it really means
seems to me to be a reflection of their
creator and possibly an Ence if we
extrapolate it of his
[Music]
existence hello everyone watching and
listening today I'm speaking with Dr
John Lenox mathematician Professor
author of many books and public
intellectual we discuss the axioms and
the dangerous aims of transhumanism the
interplay between ethical Faith reason
and the empirical world that makes up
the scientific Endeavor and the line
between luciferian intellectual
presumption and wise courageous
exploration so I I wanted to start by
asking you your opinion on some
questions that have gone through my mind
uh recently and there's one that's very
specific I think I'll start with which
is that you know I I think for for a lot
of my life and certainly when I was
younger I really bought the doctrine
that there was an unbridgeable gap
between the scientific way of looking at
the world and the Christian way of
looking at the world let's say and uh
that this that that split the split the
apparent split
between science and religion was a
consequence of an
incommensurate d otomy of World Views
you know and that the church had been
opposed to Scientific progress at least
in part because the scientific Viewpoint
existed in contradiction
to Christian doctrine but then
especially in recent years in the last
10 years I've started to understand that
that was something like a French
Enlightenment SL
rationalist propaganda campaign and
that there's a different that the the
relationship
between science and Christianity is much
closer than I had imagined I caught on
to this a little bit by reading Yung but
that just as the universities developed
out of the monastic
tradition the notion that the natural
world was intelligible to the inquiring
logos that it had an intrinsic logic
that studying it would be
beneficial to man first of all that it
would be comprehensible and beneficial
and that that was actually a kind of
moral
obligation that all struck me as like
axiomatic statements of faith that were
predicated on the Christian tradition
that
were the preconditions for the emergence
of Science and you know I've tried to
take that idea apart over the last three
or four years to see if I can find any
flaws in it but I think the evidence
that the
universities emerged out of the monastic
tradition instead of emerging contrary
to that that's absolutely
incontrovertible on every grounds you
could possibly imagine and the notion
that you need to believe in the
intelligibility of the world the
capability of the human logos and the
and the
beneficial consequence of acquiring
knowledge you have to believe in all
that to even get the scientific
Enterprise going I also think that's
incontrovertible and that those are
axioms of faith and so I don't know how
I don't know if those views are in
accordance with your views or what you
think about that so I'd like to hear
what you think about that this is
extremely interesting to me because I
never saw the tension between
Christianity and science because very
early on as a
teenager I was introduced to the
writings of a scientist who was a
Christian who drew my attention to
something Alfred North Whitehead wrote
and it was really put in much simpler
Language by CS Lewis when he wrote men
became scientific because they expected
law in nature and they expected law in
nature because they believed in a
lawgiver and so very early on and I was
fascinated by the idea that actually
modern science is a legacy of the
biblical worldview and therefore it's no
accident that the Pioneers Galileo
Kepler uh Newton Maxwell and so on were
Believers in God and as you pointed
out it underpins the tradition that lies
behind the great universities of the
world that the doctrine of creation was
actually the belief the underlying
presupposition that allowed people to do
science so I've come over my life to the
conclusion that science and the biblical
worldview sit very comfortably together
but it's science and Atheism that do not
sit comfortably together which I know is
quite a controversial statement but at
least it gets discussion
going I just completed a couple of
documentaries with the daily War plus
crew and one of them was in Athens and
two were in Jerusalem and we were trying
to puzzle out the um relationship
between Greek thought
and and judeo-christian thought most
particularly the strange happen stance
that the Greek idea of an intrinsic
logos in the world seemed to dovetail
with the judeo Christian idea of you
might say the of the word incarnate in
the human psyche and it seemed to me and
obviously to other observers that there
was an affinity between the Greek idea
that the cosmos had an intrinsic
comprehensibility and the idea that the
proper orientation for human beings
ethically would be one of honest
communication and investigation and
those two things snapped on top of each
other and it it it made me think of
something that I actually learned from
Richard Dawkins and I think this is a
deep idea Dawkins wrote a very
influential
essay where he claimed that any organism
that can function in an environment has
to be a microcosm of that
environment so for example if you were
an alien biologist and you were
presented with a terrestrial bird and
you took the bird apart you could infer
from the bird's structure the
gravitational pole of the Earth the
density of the atmosphere the um the
chemical composition of the atmosphere
spere the electromagnetic frequency that
the sun light was uh what would you say
most at at what electromagnetic
frequencies the Sun's light was most
amenable to Vision Etc you could derive
a model of the environment from the
physiology of the organism now I know
that there were Medieval ideas that were
that were deep in Christianity that the
human soul was a microcosm of the cosm
most right that it reflected the
structure of reality itself and I've
been thinking about this in terms
of how the world might be best
conceptualized so there's a mix of ideas
here and if we're If an organism has to
be a microcosm of the cosmos in order to
function and we are a microcosm in that
regard and we are a personality that
runs on a narrative which we seem to be
then in what way is it reasonable to
claim that
the the cosmos itself is best
conceptualized as something that could
be entered into relationship with
personality to personality and that
that's not the most fundamental
reflection of reality I mean it seems to
me that that's where daw's thought
eventually points if his Proclamation
that an organism has to be a microcosm
an accurate microcosm in order to
survive is accurate so now that
dovetails with the idea that
the logos as a personality so that would
be the judeo-christian concept can
investigate the logos of the universe
and that those things dovetail I'm so
now I know that's a complicated mish
mash of ideas but I'm interested in your
thoughts on that well I I I think
there's a lot in that actually and I
recall listening to you give a very
interesting lecture on Genesis 1 and
when you came to the statement that
human beings are made in the image of
God you paused and you pointed out that
this was the Cornerstone of our
civilization and I agree with that
entirely I think that what Dawkins is
saying actually points in the exact
opposite direction to what his worldview
is which is atheism of course in other
words that we can read off from creation
something about the idea of a Creator
and as you say it dubb Tales perfectly
let me put this another way I'm a
mathematician by background and a
linguist I love language and Mathematics
is a very sophisticated language but I
love natural languages as well and it
seems to me that where this fits
together best is first in the fact that
we can do science in the sense that
there is a rational intelligibility to
the universe which is the foundation of
modern science and is a legacy of the
biblical worldview so that the
mathematical describ ability uh Einstein
talked about he couldn't imagine any
genuine scientist without faith in that
it's the axom for doing science is to
believe the universe is intelligible but
if you ask for the rationale behind that
why do we believe the universe is
intelligible it Bears the imprint of a
Creator and I see that at the level of
mathematics it its capacity to at least
in part give us a handle on what's out
there and also in biology where we we
have at the heart of every living cell
the longest word we've ever found the
genetic code and all of that leads me to
formulate it as follows that we live in
a word based universe and that's the key
of the logos for
me okay and so what do you mean in that
case so what do you mean
specifically that we live in a
word-based universe what does that mean
for you on the broader conceptual
landscape well it means that this
universe is not simply a product of
natural unguided forces it is a product
of a rational Creator an intelligent
Creator and I believe even more than
that a personal Creator now how I get
there is only in part from a respon on
the universe as I find it the point you
made about each organism being a
microcosm of its environment it's also
it seems to me that there are two
sources two major sources of
knowledge there is first of all
observing the universe science Etc then
there are the humanities but there's
also the concept of Revelation in which
I believe in other words it's not simply
the human Quest for the Creator it's the
Creator revealing himself so for me the
Anchor Point in the end is that the
logos became human and we beheld his
glory in other words we can see exactly
what this means in terms of what we can
understand that is the human uh being in
which God encoded himself in in Christ
now those are big ideas of course
they're very deep ideas they need
unpacking but that's it's essentially
where I'm coming from okay so all right
so let let me let me elaborate in two
directions with regards to that so the
first is that so one of the axioms of
Faith that's necessary before you embark
on the scientific Endeavor as an
individual or as a culture which might
explain why science emerged in the
judeo-christian context and and no other
place is that the universe is
intrinsically intelligible but there
there's another Axiom two which is that
the investig the honest investigation of
that intelligibility will be good and so
there is this insistence in Genesis when
God casts order out of chaos and creates
the world after each day of creation he
says he States explicitly and it was
good and when he creates man I believe
he he says that it is very good and so
and the reason for that is that not only
is there an order but the order is in
its deepest sense beneficial and
positive and the thing is is that it's
easy and even rational it might be easy
and even rational to take the
Frankenstein monster view of the
investigation of the world and to say
well even if the cosmos is intelligible
that doesn't mean that our investigation
into it is intrinsically good or that it
would bear good fruit now you have to
believe that the truth will set you free
in order to be a scientist because if
you believed that the truth had no
bearing on human flourishing let's say
then the whole Enterprise would be
pointless and if you believe that the
investigation of the complexities of
material reality would lead us astray
then you'd say that that should be taboo
and forbidden but that isn't what we
decided we decided that the or the
revealed order would be good and then
I'll add one other thing to that which I
think is also axiomatic which is
part of the logos
idea in its deepest sense is that we are
required
to explore investigate and communicate
about everything as deeply as possible
so the idea you have this idea in job
that is quite welldeveloped that no
matter what God and the devil throw at
you you're called upon to maintain your
equilibrium and your faith in the
intrinsic goodness of being
and then that's expanded in the gospels
because the trials of Christ are the
most extreme trials that can be imagined
and and I mean that literally that's
partly why the story has such potency
right it's the worst possible sequence
of events that could happen to the least
possibly deserving person and that's a
injunction to accept all of the terrible
catastrophes of Life full on in this
supposition that doing so is the manner
in
which life most abundant could reveal
itself and if you're a scientist and the
real scientists are like this and I
think Dawkins in this way is a real
scientist is that you're actually
committed to the truth right you put
that above all else and you wouldn't do
that if you didn't believe that the
logos of commitment establishes the
order that is good and I don't think you
do that without intrinsic belief that
it's something like human beings are
made in the image of God I I can't see
any escape from that
rationale nor can I and it's interesting
that when I did my debate with Dawkins
in the Oxford natural history museum at
the press conference afterwards we were
asked was there anything that we agreed
on and there was one thing and that is
that truth exists and and this is a
crucial thing it depends that we are
committed to The Pursuit Of Truth
otherwise as you say science is
absolutely no point I happen to believe
that truth of course is not simply
propositional truth but ultimately truth
is a person and that is the very deep
claim I am the way the truth and the
life and it's interesting there that
that Jesus wasn't merely saying I say
true things this goes much deeper I am
the truth and if we set up a sequence of
questions about anything what is the
truth about the atom well you can split
it into Elementary particles what is the
truth about those I believe this claim
is so big that it's actually saying that
at the end of the backward sequence of
questions Jesus Christ will say I am the
truth and of course that resonates with
what you were studying in Exodus so
interestingly I am is the fundamental
proposition about the nature of God
right right right so that's that's an
existential proposition that has to do
with action so Thomas well okay so when
Thomas wrote the the um the what
was it his theory of Scientific
Revolution I can't remember the name of
the book exactly at the moment the
structure of scientific revolutions now
yes did something that other
philosophers of science did in the 20th
century you know he laid out the case
for science being a coherent set of
explicit statable propositions and
that's generally what people think of as
science but that's not accurate nor
sufficient by any stretch of the
imagination so so I'll give you an
example of this and we can expand on
that so my graduate supervisor Robert
Peele was a real
scientist and what that meant was that
he conducted himself in a certain way it
wasn't a matter of the things he
believed explicitly it was the a matter
of the way that he conducted himself
let's say as a laboratory researcher
okay so and that conduct was oriented
around a variety of ethical propositions
so um he was very generous with his
ideas and what that meant was he had a
lot of ideas because he would share them
with his graduate students for example
and the undergraduates and they would
respond positively and that would
reinforce the mechanism within him that
generated ideas and then ideas would
flow forth more abundantly and so that
was part of the scientific ethos to be
generous with ideas and then a the next
part of that was if he published his
scientific research papers he was
generous in the credit he gave to his
graduate student collaborators generally
listing them as the first author and
putting himself in the final place which
is a convention among genuine scientists
and so um he played Fair on the
reputational front and then I had a
supervisor like that I had a supervisor
like that at Cambridge yeah well it's a
great good for you can't become a
successful scientist it's very difficult
to become a successful scientist without
someone like that to Apprentice with yep
okay so then on the statistical analysis
front so you know people who know know
anything about statistics think that you
take a spreadsheet of numbers and dump
it into a meat grinder and crank the
handle and out comes truth and that is
100% false because when you're doing
statistical analysis it's a form of
critical thinking and exploration and
you're making ethical decisions at every
choice point so you have to figure out
which data points constitute outliers
because maybe there was a measurement
error for example while you were
sampling that particular behavior and um
you you have to tilt the statistical
investigation to some degree against the
outcome that you're hoping for to make
sure that you don't fool yourself and
it's saturated with ethical decisions
and then that all has to be nested
within a the presumption first of all
the presumption that you should not ever
publish false data just to move your
career forward you know and you might
say well why the hell not and also that
you are required on ethical grounds to
let go of your tyrannical
presuppositions if the data reveals that
what you're clinging to for your own
psychological reasons is wrong and all
of that's all of that's an attitude of
ethical conduct and not a
of explicit statable propositions and
yeah that's that's hugely important
Richard feeman the physicist the Nobel
Prize winner used to say You must Bend
backwards to criticize yourself because
you are the easiest person to fool and
I'm very interested in this ethical
Dimension because this is over and
Beyond the propositions and the
methodology of science I think it was
Einstein who said you may talk about the
ethical foundations of science but you
cannot talk about the scientific
foundations of Ethics so this is another
layer in looking at the universe it's
rationally intelligible but it's also a
moral universe and ethical
presuppositions and decisions infect all
of our lives and they do affect the
scientific Endeavor it's not just
dispassionate observation and making
conclusions and theories there's a huge
ethical de ition which raises deep
questions as to what the reference point
is who said so what are the Norms behind
that ethical decision making
process going online without expressvpn
is like changing while leaving your
window wide open you might not have
anything to hide but why give someone
random the chance to invade your privacy
when you go online without a VPN
internet service providers can see every
single website you visit they can
legally sell this information without
your consent to ad companies and Tech
Giants and then use your data to Target
you when you use expressvpn internet
service providers cannot see your online
activity your identity is anonymized by
secure VPN server and your data is also
encrypted for maximum protection
expressvpn is so easy to use just fire
up the app and click one button to get
protected plus it works on all your
devices such as your phones laptops and
even routers so everyone who shares your
Wi-Fi can be protected secure your
online activity by visiting
expressvpn.com Jordan that's
expressvpn.com Jordan for three extra
months free expressvpn.com
[Music]
Jordan well it it also implies that the
scientific truth that's truest and and
beneficial simultaneously is actually
the conjunction in this Athens Jerusalem
sense it's actually the conjunction of
the intrinsic logic of the objective
world making itself manifest to the
truthful penetrating psyche of the human
Observer it's the interaction between
these two those two that constitute
scientific truth and not one or the
other and so and there's no getting see
and what the atheist materialists would
like to do is to say well the world of
facts speaks for itself but that's also
technically untrue because there's an
infinite number of facts they're
certainly not all relevant we can drown
the plethora of facts and we certainly
will do will do that and to even
communicate about them or study them or
even draw our attention to them we have
to prioritize and hierarchically arrange
the facts and we do that according to an
ethic and I think that's actually I
think that is incontrovertible on
scientific grounds because we have seen
the emergent realization in a whole
variety of domains AI not least that
there are facts but those facts have to
be prioritized and you prior I facts
within ethic that's absolutely right
there's a deeper problem it seems to me
with the atheist understanding of
Science and that is this that we do the
science with our minds some people think
the mind the brain are the same I leave
that aside since you're an expert on on
the on the mind and the Brain but I I
often say to people um you know what do
you do science with I've asked many
leading scientists this they say well I
do it with my mind and my brain give me
a brief account of the brain and they
say to me well the brain is the end
product of a Mindless unguided process
and I pause and I look up straight in
the eye and I smile and I say and you
trust it tell me honestly if you knew
that the computer you use or the
Machinery you use in the lab was the end
product of a Mindless unguided process
would you trust it and the interesting
thing I've done a lot of experiments
with this little story I have always got
the answer no I would not so I say you
have a problem in other words your
atheism is undermining the very
rationality you use not only to do
science but to construct any argument
whatsoever it's not only shooting itself
in the foot it's worse it's shooting
itself in the brain let me let me ask
you about something you said earlier
about Revelation so I've also
been i' I've been very interested in the
what would you call it the the
anthropological psychology of the
development of thought that's a good way
of thinking about it is that how is it
that human beings came to think now Carl
Yung said something very interesting
about thought about typical thought
normative thought and he said the
typical person doesn't think what
happens to the typical person is that
thoughts appear to them and they accept
them as axiomatically true without
further
investigation and so and I and I believe
that to be the case I think that in
order to think
critically you have to set up in the
theater of your
imagination um something that holds a
proposition and defends it and then an
adversary or two adversaries that take
it apart and so you're actually
producing a collective within that will
then hash out the thought but that's led
me down the rabbit hole of trying to
understand what we mean when we say
something like I thought which would be
the sort of thing that scientists would
say when they're talking about how they
do science well I thought up my
hypothesis it's like you know that's not
much of an explanation there buddy like
what do you mean you thought it up
because you didn't know the hypothesis
let's say yesterday and now you do know
it and so how did you not know it then
and how do you know it now and how is it
that that new idea manifested itself and
the answer is always going to be well it
came to me and so that's the crucial
thing I want to dive into so here's how
I think the hypothesis generation
process works and scientists very rarely
talk about this he they talk about the
observable data but they don't talk
about the mechanism by which the
investigative question was formulated
and that's a huge Luni right that's a
huge domain of unconsciousness so this
is how it seems to me is that first of
all you have to have a
problem and so that's something that
calls to you generally because people
are generally gripped by a problem right
it isn't that they choose it voluntarily
precisely it comes knocking they can
open the door to it but it's something
that grips them and compels them and it
has a kind of autonomy in that sense um
you know if something really besets you
as a problem you can't shake it it dogs
you and and that that seems like a kind
of autonomy on the part of the problem
and also there's a million problems that
could beset you but some stand out
against the background right I think
that's equivalent to the burning bush by
the way anyway so you have a problem and
you're you're searching humbly for a
solution and humbly because you have to
admit that you have a problem and you
have to admit that you don't know to
answer and then if you open yourself up
whatever the hell that means you'll get
a revelation and the revelation will be
an Insight where it'll be something that
strikes you as probable or likely and so
that's the first element that's the
first two elements of thought the first
element is a felt lack and that would be
an admission of personal insufficiency
on some vital front the next would be
the knocking which is I would like to
know the answer the
next seat part of the sequence is a
revelation as far as I can tell and it's
be something appears to you and it
Springs out of the Void for all intents
and purposes and you can say you thought
it up but you're not saying any more
than it appeared to me there's no more
content in those two descriptive uh uh
what would you call approaches and then
once the Revelation makes itself
manifest you can analyze it critically
or you can subject it to further
empirical analysis and to the criticism
of others and it's that whole panoply of
sequenced processes that make up thought
but there's revelatory element to that
that seems to me to
be
irreducible now the question is from
from where is the Revelation
spring I would sympathize with that
analysis very very much I I think
thought is a little bit like time uh as
Augustine said everybody knows what time
is until they try to Define it and I
certainly think that the idea that it
came to me actually it cogs in with my
own experience of my limited success in
mathematical research it came to me I I
think there are other dimensions of
course as well you're absolutely right
to try to take this question of
analyzing hypothesis deeper because
things often play a role that folk
wouldn't think about like dreams like
hunches like intuition and all this kind
of thing and whether it to us swelling
up from the unconscious or all this kind
of thing because I wonder let me step
back from this one second I wonder if we
have to think in terms of different
levels of Revelation for example if I
want to get to know you and you want to
get to know me it's no use me putting
you into a tomography machine and
looking at your brain waves I will never
get to know you unless you reveal
yourself to me and usually that will be
you speak to me as you are now and I
speak to you that is partly Revelation
if you never say anything I'll never get
to know you now those words that you use
are coming from inside you and they have
to do with your mind and your brain and
all that very sophisticated stuff that
we really know very little about because
we don't even know what Consciousness is
but I wonder if above and beyond that
kind of human level of revelation or
what wells up when we've looked at a
problem or something else what wells up
in our minds we have to have a separate
category which I would call Divine
Revelation now whether the two whether
the two Dove tail and flow into one
another is is an interesting matter
because if you go back to
Genesis one of the most interesting
things is we're told we're made in the
image of God but it was God that told
human beings to do biology
name the animals that's taxonomy it's
the fundamental intellectual discipline
I'm not going to do it for you you do it
for yourself and so the capacity of
human beings to think in that sense
whatever it really means seems to me to
be a reflection of their creator and
possibly an Evidence if we extrapolate
it of of his
existence okay so now let's take this
idea of of the source of thought and the
different levels of depth let's explore
that for a minute so I'm I'm going to
describe a potential Pitfall down that
route so let's say that I'm a scientist
and a bright idea strikes me or I'm an
artist and a bright intuition strikes me
now I have two options when I'm
considering that
Source I could consider that a
manifestation of The Same Spirit of
intuition and Revelation that has made
itself manif EST as part and parcel of
the creative Enterprise of all of
mankind since the dawn of time right a
continu of that same
process which which insinuates something
transpersonal about it right it's the
operation of something Transcendent or I
can take personal credit for it and say
I thought it up now the problem with the
latter approach as far as I can tell is
first of all I think it's I think it's
incautious and unwarranted because you
know the great scientists have always
said that they stand on the shoulders of
giants and can see farther for that
reason is we are part of a great
Collective creative Enterprise and God
only knows how deep that goes but then
there's also the terrible threat of
self-deification that might otherwise
make itself manifest you know and I see
that emerging in our culture I see part
of what's happening in our culture a
kind of extension of demented
protestantism where instead of the god
that revealed itself to Moses saying I
am what I am it's the individual person
who says I am what I am I get to Define
myself I'm the source of all wisdom and
Revelation my brain my psyche my
subjectivity with with no humility in
that regard and I actually think that
that's a that's a devastating cultural
impropriety because it elevates the
subjective in to the status of God and
that's a luciferian crime it is
absolutely and specifically a luciferian
crime because the Temptation you shall
be as Gods is in the very first pages of
Genesis and it fascinates me that the
Temptation came in a very clever way
giving the impression that God wants to
hold you humans down he doesn't want you
to raise to his level don't you realize
if you go against his word then you will
rise in the hierarchy of being and you
will be as Gods knowing good and evil
and what fascinates me uh about that Dr
Peterson is this in the first section of
Genesis you have God's word creating the
universe and God said and God said and
God said in the second part you have
God's word in a Prohibition defining
morality and the first humans are
encouraged to go against it by being
promised godhood and the knowledge of
Good and Evil not knowledge of course
God wanted them to have lots of
knowledge it was the knowledge of Good
and Evil that nobody wants and what I
see in current society and I very much
applaud your stance on this because it
seems to me that the whole hodas
phenomenon as for example Illustrated in
the book by yal Noah Harari on
artificial
intelligence this idea of transhumanism
that actually we should go for this and
turn human beings into Gods seems to me
to be incredibly dangerous and it's the
height of Pride arrogance and it is very
destructive okay so so in the late 1800s
when n you observed that God was dead it
was a very complex observation because
people like to think of that as a
triumphal triumphalis Proclamation by
this emancipatory philosopher and that
wasn't the case at all because n
basically said that God was dead and we'
killed him and we'll never find enough
water to wash away the blood right I
mean he knew it was a catastrophe and he
he prophecied that three things would
happen one would be that there would be
a wicked turn towards a kind of hopeless
nihilism because every structure of
morality had fallen apart the second
would be the rise of totalitarian
substitute tions for God and N actually
specified communism as a likely
candidate and also prophecied that
hundreds of millions of people would die
as a consequence which was quite the
damn prophecy for for the mid late
1800s and and then he also said But the
alternative is that we could create our
own values and that was the route that n
saw as the way out now there's a couple
of problems with that and Technical
problems you might say one is well we
don't live very long and it isn't
obvious that any of us singly is wise
enough to create our own
values the second problem is as the
psychoanalysts point out pointed out
very quickly it isn't obvious at all
that we're Masters in our own houses
because even if you only look at the
spiritual realm as equivalent to
something like the unconscious we're all
haunted beings and we can't necessarily
trust our judgment and this the third
problem there's four the third problem
is that well who do you mean by the we
that will create our own values like
which aspect of the psyche is now going
to create value n said himself that each
Drive tends to philosophize in its own
spirit and so in order for us to create
our own values in some sort of
transcendent sense you have to
hypothesize the hierarchical integration
of the psyche towards some superordinate
end and that speaking in some voice and
it isn't obvious to me at all that that
would be a subjective voice I think it
would be Ain so so what happens with
Moses is when he investigates the
burning bush he goes deeper and deeper
into the investigation and the first
thing that happens is well his attention
is attracted the second thing is that he
starts to notice that he's treading on
sacred ground right because he's getting
deep into the
phenomen and the third thing that
happens is that and this is relevant to
your notion of levels of Revelation is
that the voice of being itself speaks to
him right the Eternal Transcendent voice
of being and Moses is smart enough he's
wise enough to know that that's not him
right it's something above and beyond
him and he doesn't take credit for it
and that's partly why he never turns
into a pharaoh in the desert right he
separates himself from the source of
sovereignty as such and I don't see how
that can be done in the rationalist
atheist materialist realm of
conceptualization you fall in
subjectivist trap okay okay no no nor do
I and I I think nature in that sense was
a kind of profit and we're seeing the
Damage Done you know ever since I was
very young I was fascinated by the polar
opposite of my Christian Heritage and
that has led me to spend quite a lot of
time in Russia and I've talked about
these kind of things to Russian friends
many of whom suffered in the gulag and I
remember one conversation with a leading
academician and he said to me he said
you know John he said we thought we
could get rid of God and retain a value
for human beings and we woke up too late
to realize that it cannot be done and it
was nature that said if if you destroy
God you lose all right to the kind of
values that we accept in a sense deep
down in our uh judeo Christian culture
and what is so interesting about Moses
and I loved your
discussion about that is
that he came face to face not only with
the concept of transcendence but
Transcendence itself and he was brought
into the presence of the very glory of
God and you were discussing in your
Round Table how in Hebrew cavod glory is
associated with way wait and that leads
me to think relevant to what you've just
said about CS Lewis I'm old enough to
have listened to CS Lewis by the way
when I was younger and CS Lewis in the
1940s saw exactly what was going to
happen if a group of human beings took
it into their heads to determine and
redefine all future Generations through
genetic experimentation and so on and in
two books abolition of man and That
Hideous Strength he spelled that out and
he he made the point that if that
happens it is not going to liberate
human beings in fact it's going to
abolish them because what will be
created by say playing around with the
germline is not human beings but
artifacts and so he writes the final
Triumph of humanity scientists will be
the abolition of man and it's that that
I fear is really permeating our culture
I mean the Caesars in Rome and the
Babylonian Emperors who thought of
themselves as Gods looks pretty trivial
stuff compared with this Insidious
teaching uh that's around in
particularly the Western world today
that we are actually all gods and we
ought to rise to this and the only way
to rise to it is to reject the
Transcendent completely there is nothing
above
us okay so so let's delve into that a
little bit um because the devil's always
in the details and so you know when I
had when I had little
kids I thought once about my son when he
was about three and you know there's a
terrible fragility to Children right and
I mean adults are fragile obviously we
all are because we're mortal and
vulnerable and prone to suffering and
uh I thought about my three-year-old son
you know and I thought well he has this
terrible vulnerability wouldn't it be
good if that could be ameliorated now
you can do that two ways say you can you
can Institute protective mechanisms that
Shield them from the depredations of the
world or you can strive to make them
into this sort of competent people that
can take the world on on their own right
and it's akin to the gospel ideas I
would say that you know you can you can
learn to handle serpents and that's your
best defense against serpents is that
way you get to have the benefits of
being and develop into someone
simultaneously capable of bearing the
weight of being let's say and I don't
know if you can have being without it
having a wait you know I I don't even
know it's like it's possible that mortal
limitation is the price you pay for
being I I don't know how things are
constructed it it could well be uh what
you're saying reminds me of dovi who
said that he couldn't
imagine uh a great person who had not
known some kind of suffering and what we
try to do with our children is somehow
to limit that but we realize that part
of their maturing uh has to do with how
they learn to handle life and we don't
want to leave them defenseless do we so
what you're raising is a very big set of
questions now you mentioned that
transhumanism attempts to solve some of
this vulnerability and of course some
things are very good I I we glasses and
uh they enhance my vision and they're
very important but this idea of hararis
where he sets two agenda items for the
21st century firstly to abolish physical
death to solve it as a technical medical
problem and then to enhance human
Happiness by genetic engineering and
Cyborg engineering and so so forth I
take a very radical view of that when
people hold out this promise to me I I
simply say to them you're too late the
problem of physical death was solved 20
centuries ago because I think there's
strong evidence that Jesus Christ rose
from the dead and the problem therefore
of developing some kind of immortality
was simultaneously sold with that
because Christ promises to those that
trust him and follow him that he will
eventually raise them from the dead and
that will be the best uploading you can
ever imagine of brains body and
everything else so I take a very radical
view that the transhumanist ideal is
bound to fail there are deeper reasons
behind that as well well so there's also
a biological truism on the genetic front
and so for
example and it it's it's summed up in
the phrase there is no breeding for for
evolutionary Fitness like you cannot you
cannot rationally breed uh a variant of
cattle for example that are going to be
um more successful at surviving in the
Ecology of cattle it's not possible and
part of the reason for that as far as I
can tell it's a deep problem part of the
reason for that is that the Horizon of
the future actually transforms
unpredictably like actually
unpredictably technically unpredictably
it's not
deterministic and what that means is
that you cannot make a rational
calculation that will determine a priori
what direction Evolution should go in in
order to be more successful and it's
also for that reason that what the
evolutionary process does is capitalize
on actual random chance in order to
produce variant that can meet the
transforming Horizon of the future and
so now the theory has been forever that
genetic mutation is random and and part
of the reason for that is that it's it
part of its mechanism there are a
variety one of its mechanisms is the
damage of DNA molecules by cosmic rays
which is definitely random but you know
there was a study published a year ago
or two years ago in nature this is so
interesting and and bears on our our our
issues here that even though the
mechanism of variability at the DNA
molecule level is truly
random there are repair mechanisms that
fix damage to DNA
molecules and there's a hierarchy of
genes such that some genes are so
crucial to morphological development
that if they mutate death is virtually
certain or severe limitation right on
the reproductive front virtually certain
whereas there are other variable
variations that are permissible with
within the realm of likely
survivability and the accuracy of the
repair mechanisms is proportionate to
the depth of profundity of the genetic
code the genes that are most crucial to
survival are repaired with 100%
accuracy so there's room for variation
at The Fringe now the reason I brought
that up is partly
because there's an implication in
the futurist posthumanist types that
they could breed a better person by
rational means but that means accepting
the proposition a priority that you can
compute what constitutes
better rationally that you actually know
enough about that and that's also a
derivation of the notion that we can
create our own values and I don't think
any of that's actually tenable I think
it's likely to produce all sorts of
catastrophic um unpredicted
outcomes that's much more likely like
those would be mutations that are
counterproductive in every way so to
speak that's much more likely than we're
that than the notion that we're going to
hit the target more squarely by mucking
about with our luciferian rationality
that's I I think I think that's
absolutely right but it raises a number
of other questions because the tcid
Assumption I against a lot of this and
it was formulated recently that
Evolution has brought us to where we are
in the present and intelligent design
will bring us to our stated goal in the
future and I uh like you I deny the
second proposition but the first is
beginning to look very shaky indeed now
I'm not a biologist but I do study a lot
of the recent developments called the
third wave in biology which are
associated with systems biology Dennis
Noble and jimes Shapiro and so on who
now question seriously the whole
darwinian um scheme the Neo darwinist
explanation because although it's still
accounts for variation they're now
pretty clear it accounts for very little
else and statements like ly marula
saying that it's dead and my colleague
here Dennis Noble who founded systems
biology says that it's not fit for
purpose it doesn't need to be modified
and therefore replaced and therefore I I
suppose part of my skepticism comes from
mathematics we've always been skeptical
about the idea that random processes can
increase information as distinct from
variant so I have huge problems with
this which is why I wrote a book about
it recently so the two problems are for
me one I I do not really believe that
darwinian Evolution does all that people
think it does it certainly does
something but secondly that looking
towards the future I I the idea that we
will take it into our hands and
intelligently move towards the goal of a
superum I think is immensely dangerous
because it's the creation of God and
there's a a lovely little quote from a
conference recently that I picked up a
biology conference and a student was
there there and um she said oh it sounds
as if you're creating God to the speaker
and he says exactly that is exactly what
we're trying to do and I do think that's
doomed to failure for the reasons that
you have been so expressit about yeah
well you know you might aim at creating
God but that doesn't mean that the
Transcendent entity that you produce
will be godone absolutely not so right
right I mean you you'd have to have a
fair bit of huus to assume that you
would hit the target that exactly so
I've been thinking about you know you
mentioned when we were talking about the
dangers of transhumanism and the
abolition of man you know you rightly
pointed out very rapidly that well you
know you have reading glasses and you're
pretty damn happy with that you have
these prosthesis that help you
ameliorate your vulnerability and you
wouldn't give them up and you do
recognize them as positive goods and you
know and you could say with a fair bit
of uh credibility that the fact that you
have reading glasses is one way that
you've transcended your mortal
limitations now not entirely now so now
we're faced with the problem of given
our Advanced technological capability
there are a variety of biological
limitations that in principle we could
transcend and then we might say well
which of those should we transcend and
so I have a complicated answer to that
you tell me what you think about this
you know I thought a long while back
about the problem of lying you know
because it's reasonable for a young
child or a young adult for that matter
to ask the question well why shouldn't I
just lie all the time if I can get what
I want and I can avoid unpleasant
responsibility by doing so like and
every child knows this which is and
every adult for that matter which is why
we lie because we assume that we can
Sherk off a certain unpleasant
responsibility or can gain an
opportunity and like what the hell why
not do it and so I thought about that
for a long time it's like well what
exactly is the problem here and then I
realized you know when you're there'll
be times in your life where very very
complicated dilemmas will confront you
like life and death situations and and
you'll be suffering and so will the
people around you and that will be no
joke and then you bloody well better be
have you better have a clear head at
that moment because if you make the
wrong decision you're going to take the
catastrophe that surrounds you and
you're really going to turn it into
something indistinguishable from hell
and then you might say well how can you
be sure that you have a clear head when
the storms come and the answer is well
how about if you don't allow the detrius
in Your Vision to accumulate voluntarily
right how about you don't blind yourself
with lies how about you don't pollute
the very mechanism that orients you in
the world so that you have something to
rely on when
the difficulties come and I would say
maybe it's the same thing on the moral
front right because maybe the answer to
what should our limitations be on the
scientific front isn't a list of
prohibitions in the explicit knowledge
uh realm but something like we should
bloody well be sure that if we're going
to be good
scientists that we're truly ethically
oriented so that when a technological
possibility makes itself manifest to us
we have enough wisdom to judge whether
or not that's a direction that wise
people would walk down so I read this
book a while back a it was written by a
KGB agent and he purported to have
knowledge of a chemical weapons research
program in the former Soviet Union and
the goal of the program was to generate
a hybrid of Ebola and
smallpox and then to aerosolize it for
large scale distribution and he reported
that the Soviets had killed a number of
people 500 or so accidentally as a
release of some of the chemical
compounds or biological compounds this
lab had been producing but you know it
made me think because technically
scientifically outside the realm of of
ethics and and subjective value there's
no reason why how might we breed a ebola
smallpox
um hybrid there's no reason that that's
not a valid scientific question right
from the perspective of the of the pure
facts if the facts have no value then
any other any fact is worth pursuing any
knowledge is worth pursuing but if
you're sensible and you look at
something like that you think well if
you're an ethical
scientist and you think something like
should I hybridize smallpox and Ebola
the answer should be no right that's
just a road you're not going to walk
down and if you have any
wisdom it's going to be obvious that
that's a bad Road and so it also seems
to me that in order to deal with the
catastrophic possibilities of the
post-human realm that we're going to
have to become wise enough as scientists
not to make that sort of egregious
luciferian error and I don't think think
we can do that by abandoning our
traditional metaphysics I think that
won't that won't work to say the least
absolutely it won't work because what
we're raising now is is a parallel
question to the question of truth it's
the question of the existence of the
concepts of right and wrong and defining
them and if you've got no Transcendent
uh reference point you end up with dovi
rightly saying if God does not exist
then everything is permissible he didn't
mean that atheists couldn't behave of
course they can but he meant there's no
rational justification for
distinguishing uh between right and
wrong and we got to face that on the
question of lying it's very interesting
to me that the
whole condition arose from the LIE
originally you shall be as Gods knowing
good and evil and you were talking about
people thinking why shouldn't I lie on
so on well of course one of the
arguments is that people who take that
view if you lie to them and accuse them
of something they don't believe to be
true for instance accuse them of murder
or theft or something like that you'll
soon see that they believe in truth and
they want the truth about themselves to
be known so it's entirely
inconsistent uh of course it's up to
them to take that view if they want to
but it's not one of those things that
follows one of your rules of life that
you want to be able to apply to others
what you apply to
s so so that knowing good and evil so I
think the luciferian Temptation is
that is part of
that offering of becoming as Gods is to
offer to people the possibility of
defining good and evil as
subjective creatures right so so the
prohibition that God places on Humanity
in gen genis is to not eat of the fruit
of the knowledge of Good and Evil and
it's it's a very complicated narrative
Trope um but one of
the in in what would you say the the the
the uh the the connotations right the
implications is that there is a there
are moral guidelines that are absolute
that aren't within the human realm of of
it's of the knowledge it's partly the
knowledge the ability to manipulate the
ability to change or even to Define the
Fundamental moral propositions are
Transcendent and axiomatic and they're
not in the proper domain of human
maneuvering it's something like that and
and the serpent says to man no you can
take it all you can you can have full
knowledge even of the moral axioms and
that seems to be something that's what
would you say that's off limits if the
game of being itself is to progress
without catastrophe yeah it's something
like that I think it's exactly like that
because what is interesting about
Genesis is that the first encounter we
have with Morality In the pages of
Genesis morality is defined not
horizontally between humans but
vertically between humans and God and
that's crucial it's it's God that
defines it ultimate ultimately so there
is a Transcendence from the very
beginning and it's the loss of that
transcend
that we're seeing damaging our culture
today because we've lost that common
sense of values that however distorted
it has been over the centuries that we
did owe to the biblical tradition and
now we wander in total confusion and it
interests me greatly that the pressure
particularly at young people today is to
look inside for answers to these
questions when what we need to be
teaching them is no look outside and
have your mind open to the fact that
Transcendence is real and that there is
a God and there is something bigger
there's something more than materialism
is giving you okay so so let's take that
apart a bit you could imagine that there
could be three sources of moral
knowledge that's the kind of knowledge
that orients you in the world and one
source could be the subjective now we've
already talked about the limitations
there is that well you don't live very
long and what the hell do you know and
what do you mean by the subjective like
which part of you
and and then there's the danger of
elevating yourself to the status of
final moral Arbiter which is a kind of
luciferian presumption okay so those
seem like bad pitfalls the next
objection you might say is like okay
well you can't do it just subjectively I
am who I am which is certainly the
proclamation in our culture you could do
it by
consensus you know and that's more of a
that's more The View that well the the
group gets together and sort of decides
by General agreement what right and
wrong is and that can shift with time
and place but as long as everybody is
willing to abide by the same principles
then we can Define them canonically as
good or as good but there's but the
problem with that is you run yeah go on
there's a huge problem with that you
tell me what your problem with it is and
then I'll tell you
mine well my problem with that is the
Nazi Germany problem exactly it's like
well what what the hell happens when the
whole herd stampedes towards hell if
you're a consensus person and there's
nothing else there it's like well
there's no hell that's consensus and so
the consensus by definition is right and
so if everyone decides that no Jews
would be better who the hell are you to
stand in the way and you know if you're
willing to stand up and say well you
should stand in the way well right so
upon what grounds do you make that claim
because it's not merely subjective so
that brings us back to the problem of
transcendent morality Okay so so you
going to talk about problems of
consensus yes it's exactly right that is
the problem with
utilitarianism um treating others as you
want them to treat you and by consensus
is fine if you've got equal centers of
power if you've got a whole lot of equal
centers of Power vying with one another
then you can say if you don't do this I
won't do that but the very interesting
thing about the case in point you
mentioned Nazi Germany Hitler in his
political youth made treaties but he
tore them up once he had the power and
if people say you shouldn't do that he
said what do you mean you shouldn't I've
got the power so it doesn't answer the
question why ought you to go with a herd
and and murder so many Jews and that's a
huge weakness it's all right if you're
dividing ice cream among children then
utilitarianism is fine give an equal
amount to all of them or you'll be in
trouble but at the higher level it's
shot through with this problem of the
total absence of any Transcendence the
oughtness has to come from above okay so
now you talked about power there you
know and one of the radical claims of
the postmodern types especially people
like Fuko is that the fundamental
motivating Drive of humanity and perhaps
the cosmos itself is power
now you know I I think everything Fuko
thought about everything is to be taken
with a gigantic grain of salt because
you know he was quite the awful creature
and I think he had every reason for
putting forward the proposition that
there's nothing other than power because
that justified everything he did that
was done purely on the basis of power
but but the but there's another there's
another problem that emerges with that
Proclamation which is a kind of
self-evident problem and and I would
think this is something the rationalists
have a very difficult time with which is
if I can compel you to do
something why don't the next two
propositions follow logically first of
all if I can compel you the mere fact
that I can indicates precisely that I'm
actually a better man than you because
if you are better than me you could
compel me and of course this is might
makes right but M makes right is a very
powerful Doctrine and almost all the
pre-christian Pagan societies are
operated on that basis in the most
fundamental Manner and the aristocratic
justification was something like well
you're a peasant and the cosmos has
established that you're a peasant and
I'm an aristocrat and so screw you and
and actually morally speaking because if
you weren't a useless slug you wouldn't
be a peasant and that's a very very
difficult argument to to generate a
counter proposition to and the corollary
argument is well if I can Force you
clearly I'm more powerful than you are
and that means that I have every moral
right to do so and in fact you don't
even get to object because you're too
lowly to object but that that ref and
that's the way of the world man yeah but
it reflects a a series of values that
needs to be questioned where do these
values come from to argue that the
cosmos made me an aristocrat and you a
surf is a very tenuous argument and in
the end it's seems to me that we've got
to ask ourselves the fundamental
question what basis have we for valuing
human beings as unique and again I refer
to your comment on Genesis we're made in
the image of God that gives us huge
dignity and value it was something my
parents got across to me when I was very
young and as a Christian even at the
bigger level the the idea that there's a
higher value even than the created value
which is the whole topic of Exodus and I
was utterly fascinated by your
conversation on on Exodus because the
valuation of people that is reflected in
the Passover Lamb and the sacrifice in
that God accepts them on the basis of a
sacrifice and it seems to me that
actually leads me now that I think of it
and into into another Direction one of
the problems of establishing rules of
any kind seems to me that many of
them bypass the heart of Exodus it's
very noticeable that the law of The
Commandments comes after the Passover
sacrifice after the Redemption and in
the New Testament the parallel thing uh
for Christians is the sacrifice is first
the acceptance is settled it's not on
the basis of your moral Behavior life
but that empowers you to live so that
the moral commandment in the letters of
Paul for example come after the
discussion of the sacrifice that gives
you a true value now that is something
that is lacking at the heart of our our
culture we have no answer ultimately to
the big questions of guilt and the whole
problem nobody likes the word sin but
that's what it is the the moral damage
we cause to ourselves and other people
and setting up rules and regulations is
hugely important we need them they're in
the New Testament and in the Old
Testament but I noticed that one of the
major messages of Exodus is first
Redemption and Redemption is by the
blood of the Passover Lamb to put it in
the biblical language and then the
teaching and the same exactly in the
test so let's let's let's delve into
that well so what what appears to happen
as far as I can
tell in the at in the post
Paradise Lost transition in Genesis is
that human beings are called upon to
sacrifice right and you see that
particularly in the story of Cain and
Abel because two patterns of sacrifice
are laid out in that story and one is
genuine sacrifice and that's Abel and
the other is
halfhearted
self-deceptive instrumental sacrifice
and that's Cain and not only does that
not go very well for Cain it engenders
bitter murderous resentment and then
eventually the horrors of War because
tubul Kain who's Cain's descendant is
the first artificer of weapons of war
and it's after that story that the flood
comes and also the Tower of Babel and so
there's two forms of sacrifice outlined
and someone reading that who's a
rationalist might object well why is
sacrifice necessary and I think that's
actually an utterly clueless rejoiner
and and here's why so for example if
you're going to be a scientist you know
there was a woman I think her name was
Barbara mcclint talk and she spent her
whole life studying variations of color
in so-called Indian corn and with a
consequence of that was she discovered a
variety of facts about genetic structure
that led to um technological
improvements in cancer treatment but she
labored in isolation for decades now you
might say well what was her sacrifice
and that's pretty obvious
her sacrifice was that there was a
trillion things in the world she could
have been interested in and pursued and
she sacrificed every single one of them
to the Curiosity that made itself
manifest in relationship to this strange
genetic anomaly right and the thing is
every time you focus your attention on
one thing instead of the multitude of
other things you're making a sacrifice
okay so you have to sacrifice in order
to attend an act there's no way out of
it and so then the the next question
emerges here's another element of
sacrifice if you're
immature there's only the
present as you become more mature
there's only the present and there's
only you as you become more mature
there's the future at longer and longer
durations and there's other people and
so what you do as you mature is you
sacrifice you and the present to the
Future and everyone else and if you
don't do that then you stay dangerously
immature and Psychopathic right because
you're completely self-centered and
narcissistic and so that's not good for
you because narcissistic Psychopaths
tend to fail and it's certainly not good
for everyone else so you have to
sacrifice to attend and act and you have
to sacrifice to mature and then you
might say well what's the sacrifice
that's most pleasing to
God and the answer to that has to be
something like
well yourself right you have to offer up
everything to what's Transcendent and I
think that is the that sacrifice that
you described that's an a prior act
before the coming of the law right it's
the willingness to lay it's the
willingness to voluntarily lay
everything on the line in the pursuit of
truth and life more abundance something
like that and I think that is the
pattern that's laid out in the Christian
story it looks to me like that's the
pattern yeah well let let me comment on
that I'm very interested that you
mentioned Barbara mcclint talk because
actually she discovered the jump
so-called jumping Jean and she really
was the Pioneer that's led to this third
wave of biology I mentioned earlier
that's that's just a point aside but
it's extremely interesting she was a
Pioneer and she sacrificed a great deal
but it seems to me that there we may
need to think in terms of different
kinds of sacrifice you see see at the
heart of Christianity is not my
sacrifice but God's sacrifice on my part
a sacrifice that I could not have made
but that sacrifice demands My
Sacrifice uh offer up your body as a
Living Sacrifice is what Paul says to be
as a as a Christian but I'm prepared to
do that the power to do that comes from
the fact that my acceptance with God
depends on a sacrifice that's entirely
out inside of me but can be appropriated
by me and that is when Christ died and
rose again now this this goes very deep
but it goes to the heart of God doing
something so that he can forgive me and
deal with the guilt that I have incurred
by my messed up behavior and all the
rest of it that's one thing now in
response to that yes of course we're
called upon to sacrifice and there are
all these different levels a mother
sacrifices for her child she doesn't
sacrifice to some God she gives up her
time and her energy and sometimes slaves
very hard working to make ends mate for
the children so she's given her all in
that sense and at that level but there's
a much more fundamental level that deals
with a problem of human relationship
with God that's gone wrong ever since
Genesis 3 so you you mentioned that the
mother's the maternal sacrifice and and
so there were archaic societies where
people sacrificed their children to the
gods and that meant in some sense that
they were giving up something that was
valuable and vital to please fate but
what we have come to regard as the
appropriate sacrifice on the part of the
mother is as you pointed out it's
herself to her child and and there's
something deeper there in that which is
that it's the voluntary sacrifice of the
more powerful and that would be the
mother in this case to the least
powerful right and so that's the service
of the higher to the lower as the
Exemplar of the highest form of service
that's the proper form of sacrifice and
you know I saw the pieta when I was at
St peters's the couple of times I've
been there that great Michelangelo
statue and you know that really is
emblematic to me of something
approximating the female crucifixion
right because you have Christ offering
his own being in this cataclysmic way to
the exigencies of being let's say but
you have Mary making an offering that's
of equivalent pain in some ways right
because I think it's a toss up whether
having yourself destroyed by the mob for
example is a more painful experience
than the experience of a mother watching
her child be torn apart by the ravenous
mob right but we would also say I think
to the degree that we have any sense
that a mother who is performing her role
properly Al she offers herself to the
she offers herself to the Glorious
adventure of her child right she puts
herself secondary to her child's needs
but she's also doing in a doing that in
a way that offers the child to be what
to ad to to enter upon the full
adventure of the world and that would
mean the voluntary acceptance of
something like suffering and death right
because that's the destiny of everyone
now a mother could try to protect her
child against that and against the
knowledge of that but that turns her
into well a devouring mother right
someone who destroys the burgeoning
ability of the child to thrive and so
there's a mute there's a dual acceptance
of sacrifice on the part of the properly
behaving mother she has to sacrifice
herself to the child especially in
infancy but then she has to be willing
to let the child go to be broken by the
world and that that is the root to well
as you pointed out that's part of the
Divine pattern it seems to be part of
the de Divine pattern of Eternal
salvation it's something like that it's
very paradoxical right because it means
you have to take the full weight of
mortality onto yourself voluntarily and
maintain your moral orientation and that
that's actually the key
to well that's the key to that's the key
to Paradise I suppose that's one way of
thinking about it that's a key to
reacquiring what you lost in childhood
yeah taking the full weight of morality
mortality upon yourself is hugely
important
it's transformed of course if we believe
that death is not the end
and as I am convinced that Christ rose
from the dead this introduces up for me
a huge a huge new world of possibility
that I am mortal but death is physical
death that is is not going to be the end
so as I get
older my own personal orientation
towards the future it gets brighter and
brighter because I know that whatever
happens if I am taken by cancer or coid
or anything else that there has been a
new life that I already possess
according to the New Testament a power
within me that enables me to live but
will also raise me from the dead in the
last day and that that's a huge hope of
course it's the Central Christian hope
and it would be uh unfortunate not to
hear that sight of Christianity and I
feel many people today don't listen to
the whole in a sense the whole meta
narrative that Christianity offers
because they would see in it that
there's a real Prospect for the future
that it does answer the problem of
physical death in a much better way than
the possibly sudo Promises of
transhumanist
engineering well all right let me let me
approach that psycholog olic Al um to to
some degree um when when you're talking
about anything that's theological the
psychological can only make inroads to a
certain depth but but look one of the
things that psychologists have agreed
upon on the clinical front for the last
five or six decades I would say so quite
a long time is that if you voluntary if
you can voluntarily get your clients to
expose themselves to the things that
they're afraid of and are avoiding as
they're making their way to their
destination that that makes them braver
and more competent it's not exactly that
it reduces Their Fear it produces within
them a revelation of Their Own Strength
so for example if you take a woman who's
agrh obic and who is afraid of getting
on an elevator because she thinks she'll
have a heart attack on the elevator and
be unable to get to a hospital and will
die stupidly and loudly in front of the
crowd in the elevator because that's the
typical agrob uh fantasy you can teach
her to reacquaint herself with elevators
through graduated exposure right and so
you're basically taking the thing that
she's most afraid of and then feeding it
to her in graduated doses now what
happens is she not only becomes able to
take the elevator but a lot of fears
that had beset her also vanished
simultaneously and the reason for that
is that she sees that when she
encounters something she thought was
beyond her capability there's something
within her that reveals itself that's
bigger than the fear oh but there's also
a theological aspect to that I mean I
think that psychological insight is very
important it's another example of it is
of course if someone's afraid of flying
you need to get them onto a plane you
need to acquaint them with the actual
reality of which they are afraid but but
you also get that
in situations theologically where people
are afraid of the future H and why is
that because they don't know enough
about what God offers to people to
conquer those fears it doesn't mean
they'll Disappear Completely but it
means that they can orientate themselves
and come to terms with those things so I
would take that Insight absolutely
because I use it all the time myself
with other people well then people
people shrink away if they don't have
that faith and so on the mythological
front you see this reflected in the
dragon encounter stories that tolken
made so famous for example and the idea
is that if you can find the dragon that
lurks in the deepest Cavern that's where
the gold is hoarded and so the the
Christian notion of Resurrection is a an
extension of that Corpus of ideas
because it's predicated on the notion
that if you forthrightly confronted the
whole pan of the horrors of death in its
multiple
forms death and betrayal and and and
what and the catastrophe of the mob if
you faced all of that what you would see
as a consequence is not so much Eternal
Darkness as the Eternal resurrection of
the light you know and it's a limit case
right and and I I really it's hard for
me to to know what to make of that again
on the psychological front because it's
a true
definitely both in the narrative domain
and in the Practical clinical domain is
that if you if people can find it within
themselves to voluntarily shoulder the
burden of confronting what they're
afraid of they definitely get braver and
more competent you know and some of
that's because they get informed about
themselves but there are also even
biological Transformations that take
place you know if you voluntarily face a
stressor
entirely different psychophysiological
systems are manifest in you as a cont
consequence of the voluntary
confrontation that would be manifest if
it was imposed on you involuntarily it's
a whole different spirit that inhabits
you that that's a very good way of
thinking about it it's genuinely a
different spirit that inhabits you and
it makes itself manifest all the way
from the cellular level upward and the
habitual practice of that attitude of
voluntary confrontation can switch on
new genes it doesn't just happen
conceptually it actually transforms you
physiologically and we have no idea what
the limit of that is there's a very
interesting in fact brilliant
illustration of that principle in the
New Testament in the famous story of the
man Lazarus and His Two Sisters Jesus is
with his disciples in Galilee a long way
from where they lived and they they send
him a message and say that Lazarus the
one you love is ill he was a friend of
Jesus and Jesus doesn't do anything to
come to them and allows the man to die
and in that situation um he says to his
disciples let's now go to them and
explains that Lazarus is actually dead
and they get really scared and they say
are you going to go to Judea again look
they were seeking to kill you why do you
go there again it's like committing
suicide and Thomas one of them the
doubter he says let's go with him that
we might die with him but when they go
what happens is that Jesus raises
Lazarus from the dead and that's the
light that transforms everything if they
had stayed away and not gone with him
into what was potential danger they
would have never learned that he could
raise the dead so that they stayed in
the darkness and Jesus explains the
thing in a very interesting metaphor he
talks about himself as the light of the
world and he says you know um God has
made the solar system in a very
interesting way that he's placed the
light that we see by during the day
outside our world the Suns outside our
world so if a person walks in the night
they will stumble because and here's the
observation it's a very interesting one
Jesus says because the light isn't in
them now the light is in some deep sea
creatures as we know they've got
luminescence and all the rest and I
often wish I had a built in light in my
head and sometimes I wear one a little
lamp but the point is he's saying look
the light isn't in you I am the light of
the world he that follows me will have
the light of life and I just imagine it
very simplistically that if here's the
light and here's me and the light moves
I land up in the dark but if I move with
the light I will have the light all the
time and that's exactly what happened to
these people consumed with fear they
went with him thinking they'd be killed
and then he discovered he could raise
the dead and that transformed everything
so that seems to me to be a very
powerful um exposition of what you're
saying well look John I think I think
that's a good place to end actually
we're at about the 90-minute mark really
we delved into a yes yes we are
surprisingly enough um we for everyone
watching and listening I'm going to talk
to John a bit more about how his
interests in mathematics and science and
religion develop simultaneously on the
autobiographical front so you can join
us on the dailywire plus platform for
that additional half an hour if you're
inclined to um otherwise thank you John
very much for talking to me today um I
will be in touch with you if you don't
mind about the next Exodus likee seminar
that I'm going to host in Miami maybe
you'd like to come and join us you be a
very interesting contributor as far as I
can tell and we had that was a that was
really a conception transforming
experience not only for me but for
everyone else who participated man it
was quite the trip well that's for sure
thank you so much it's been more than I
could say a pleasure to meet you and I
would be delighted to join you in that
if I could o Guinness is a very close
friend of mine and uh I I was interested
to see that at one stage you had two
people from Cambridge but nobody from
Oxford so yeah well it's probably just
sampling error you know um for everybody
watching and listening thank you very
much for your time and attention and
join us on the dailywire plus platform
if you're inclined to the film crew here
for setting this up today through the
thunderstorm much appreciated and uh
we'll see everyone watching and
listening on the next podcast thanks
John pleasure a pleasure
bye-bye
[Music]